Laser print
so yeah.
By the way, uh, we released the.
I hope you have read the announcement.
We released the midterm marks also.
You can see the feedback from the markers
why you lose Mark if you lost any mark.
Oh, thank you, thank you Aria.
And also in the last weeks.
A lecture assignments.
There were some questions that
we couldn't cover the topics,
so for this week lecture assignments
that I released last night,
I basically tried to, I mean,
select those questions as the new
I mean lecture assignments so that
you can see the there's an overlap,
so you have a chance to answer.
I mean those questions that we
couldn't cover the topics last week.
What we are going to.
Covered the topics this week,
so I mean, uh,
please don't be surprised if you see
the same question questions as last
week and also release the keys for the.
Lecture assignment of the week.
Six I think yes 6. And, uh.
Yes, that man.
If you want to review your exam papers.
You can send me send an email to me.
We can schedule a meeting in
the I mean office hour and then
we can review your paper.
Or you can simply just drop by the
office hour after the class today
also on Thursday so we can review
your exam papers if you think that.
It is an issue with the marks.
So.
I before I start,
I'm ready to take your questions.
If you have any questions
regarding the last weeks lecture
and anything related to the.
Of course.
I actually it's already there.
I mean, the keys for the midterms
are released two weeks ago.
Yes, I mean you just go to the
same folder as exam and then, uh,
just in the bottom list you can see
two files with the key, for instance,
midterm exam, one underline key.
And also midterm exam two underline key.
So these are because in the exam we had.
Two versions of the question sheet,
so based on whether you received the
first version or the second version,
you have the key.
Yeah, it's alright. I mean,
two weeks ago I will release the ideas.
OK, in general,
if the input is invalid and
not applicable truth table.
When we are designing decoder,
can we label those as don't care conditions?
Yes, yes Nick,
but we haven't covered the decoder,
so we're going to cover the decoders
and encoders this week on Thursday.
So for I mean for if you are asking
about the questions for the last week,
you can simply answer the first
few questions we're going to cover
the decoder and encoder this week,
so then you can have a better idea about
the I mean they don't care conditions,
but generally, yes.
If the input is not valid input,
you can assume that there is
a possibility for that input,
but there is no output for
that invalid input.
So then you can assume that
the output is don't care.
Going to be released so
we can see where we went.
As I said,  uh, uh,
we already released the keys.
I mean about two weeks ago,
just after the exam,
I released the key.
So in order to find the key files,
let me let me show you
where is the key files.
So if you go to the exam folder.
Here you see that in the keys is
here the key and also this one.
These are the two keys for the fires.
Uh, they were already there.
I mean one or two weeks ago I
offload the keys, yeah? Thank you.
So I'm going to start the.
Uh, today's topic actually today,
uh. It's a little bit of.
He needs to be close for Max.
Code so if decoder we need
decoder from excess free to BCD,
we need transformation from.
Accessory to BCD.
Yes, yes, actually the input gonna
be the codes in the exit 3 and the
output gonna be the codes in BCD, yes?
Oh oh, in terms of the the the terminology,
we'll see I mean this with that
when we say decoder an encoder,
we may refer to another digital units
for those that we covered last week,
which was related to the binary codes.
Usually we say that binary codes
or binary coders from one code to.
Another code so,
but this week we are going to introduce
another decoders and encoders that
are totally different from these
binary coders or binary decoders.
Usually in the question they say that
binary encoders and binary encoders,
just to emphasize that these
are binary codes.
But this week on Thursday we are
going to introduce another encoder
and decoders that they are not.
I mean, they're totally different from these.
Binary coders, yeah.
Yes, actually we already put.
I mean, you already saw the table,
the transformation tables.
So basically usually even if you
forget about the code in the exam,
you can go an open this
slide for the codes you see.
What are the codes for excess three?
Whether the codes for BCD and etc.
So usually the table is given to
you and you know the codes and you
have to just design this circuit
to do the transformation. Yeah.
Like tonight we need input exactly and.
Yes yes yeah correct yeah.
So I mean back to next question, uh?
Actually, in the Nick,
if you buy the decoder,
if you mean the binary codes that
the codes from one binary code to
another binary code, you're right.
When I was answering your question,
I thought that you're asking question about
the decoders that we haven't discussed.
So if you are talking about I
mean decoding from binary codes.
Francis from Exit 3 to BCD from
Aiken to BCD or agent to exit 3
these are called binary decoders.
You have to explicitly say that
binary because as I said later,
will see another type of decoders
that are totally different.
No, that's OK. That was my bad actually.
So let's start. So so far we said
that all the digital units can
be divided into two categories,
combination, elanne,
sequential and the main property
of the combination logic are those
that you provide the input values
and after some delays after passing
some gates you see the output and we
said that in this course we assume
that the gate delays are zero.
So basically,
whenever you provide the inputs,
you can see the output right away.
And this is the main property
of the combination logic.
We said that there is another type of digital
units that we call them sequential logic.
We haven't discussed it yet and in next week
we start to discuss that type of circuits.
Basically the main difference
is that for the sequential logic
we can add a loop or feedback.
We can attach one of the outputs to
one of the inputs we haven't seen,
so such a thing so far,
so we leave it to the I mean.
Next few weeks.
But as long as, uh,
we are dealing with in a combination logic,
we provide the input,
we design the circuit by SOPPOS or NAND
only nor only and then we see the outputs.
And.
And we said that instead of
designing a general circuits to
do a problem to solve a problem,
we want to design some circuits that
helps us to build a computer system.
So we start with calculators.
We said that for building simple
calculators we need to build a binary coders.
As we said,
we design some codes and we designed as
a sample with design excess three BCD
to excess 3 codes and we said that Y.
Those codes are advantageous because
for instance access three or a can
a day have the nice property of
self complementary meaning that.
A digit in decimal system.
If you do then honest compliment on that.
It is similar to doing the ones
compliment in binary system.
And then we discuss that.
How can we design A display decoder?
So another type of decoders are
the seven segment decoder.
So again, the name is decoder,
but it's totally for displaying
a digit decimal digit.
So now we want to focus on another main
part of a Calculator or a computer system,
which is about arithmetic
and logical operations.
So any computing system.
Need to do arithmetic?
We already know how to do
arithmetic SYN numbering system.
For instance in sign magnitude
we have a negative numbers.
We can do addition, subtraction etc.
Also in the twos complement we could
represent negative or positive numbers.
We can do the addition, subtraction.
You know the algorithm to do the
arithmetic using different numbering systems.
Now we want to design the circuits
to do those calculations for us.
So today's focus is about building the
digital circuit that does the addition,
unbinding numbers.
Or does the subtraction?
Or multiplication an etc or
comparing two binary numbers,
we want to see that how can we
build the digital circuits or
units for them and then put them.
I mean to our computer system,
I mean and then gradually make
our computer system complete.
So the first immediate arithmetic which
we need in any computer system such as,
I mean this the very simplest one,
which is the Calculator up until
the sophisticated machine such as
computer system we need addition.
So we need to build a binary adder,
meaning that a given a any number
if it transfer
or convert that number to binary system.
How can we do addition on binary system?
We said that all our system we
built is based on the binary system.
So this is the design problem
with this running circuit,
very similar to any other design
problems that we so far we solved
or with sketch the circuit.
So here we said that we want to
design A circuit that can or a
that is able to add 2 binary bits.
So we start with this smallest at Adder
or a Calculator that does the addition of.
Only two bits and then we can
extend that to adding two I mean
numbers that have more bits.
So having 2 bits up.
To add with each other,
so the first we can call it X,
the second bit we can call it Y.
So if you add 2 bits,
0 + 0 becomes zero in the sum.
This is 1 output, so we call it S as a Sam.
01 becomes 110 becomes one, but 1 + 1.
In the sun we have 0 but we have a charity,
so as a result this design needs two outputs,
so the first output is the
result of the addition,
the second output gonna be
the result of the carry.
Sometimes we don't have any carry,
but here we have a carry because
1 + 1 the result is 2/2 as a zero
in the in the first position and
then a carry to the next position.
So you see that designing a binary
adder to add 2 bits is very simple.
Now we have two output function.
You write it based on the SOP or
POS for this simple design there is
no need for simplification because
you see that the output for S.
What is this gate? XY bar or export Y?
What is this gate for?
S anybody in the chat box?
You have to immediately answer, correct?
Yes, that you know, yes.
So this is the exclusive or.
So basically if you add 2 bit it
is equal to doing the exclusive
or for the first output.
How about the carry? As you can see,
Carrie becomes one at this case.
This is the mid term free mitten.
Free is X&Y, so this is the answer.
This is the most simplest
adder that we can build so.
X exclusive or with Y is
the sum an X&Y is the carry,
so this is the design I do just.
Because we just only can add 2 bits,
we call this half adder.
Now we want to see that
why we call it half Father.
Is there any other dad?
Essence is different from
this type of other or not,
but The thing is that because
it is able only to add 2 bits,
we call it half other.
I just want to show it like this because
Justin 9 degree I mean rotation,
so this way it is very similar
to the way we add 2 bits.
So basically. Whenever we want to.
Add for instance 00.
We said at 0 + 0 the output gonna be 00.
If we add for instance 01,
it becomes as you can see here,
10 exclusive or becomes one.
And one N 0 becomes 0.
And so basically you input the
bits and you see the output result.
The sum and the carry.
And then we make it a black box,
so you design it,
you manufactured and now you can
go to the market and buy a half
adder in order to add 2 bits
whenever you have a I mean two
input variable as just each one
is 1 bit of in the binary system.
So the next, let's let let's expand this.
Now we want to add 2 binary numbers,
so binary numbers may have
more than one bits.
For instance,
if you want to add a tune,
binary numbers that have two bits.
So we want to see that.
How can we design A added that is
able to add 2 bits of numbers or two
numbers that have free bits 4 bits or N bits?
So this is the next expansion to the circuit,
so we have we want to add 2 binary
numbers that each of them has 2 bits.
So again, it is very similar to
the question in the midterm exam,
so I mean you have a.
One number.
2 bits another #2 bits and you have
to add them so if you add 2 numbers.
Let's back here.
If you add 2 numbers,
binary numbers that each one
each of them has 2 bits.
The sum of the first it's gonna be S1.
The sum of the 2nd,
it's gonna be S 2,
but this one may have X1 plus
XY1 may have the sum achnacarry.
So we call this for instance carry
one and then we add these bits
becomes S2 and may have a last carry.
So very normal edition.
So as you can see in the input,
we're gonna have four binary
variables an in the output,
we're going to have free binary outputs,
so S1 and S2 is the first 2 digit
of the result, and the last carrier.
So imagine for instance, we want to do this.
So basically this is equal to 1 one plus 01.
So if you do add this 111 becomes 2A
carry 1 + 1 + 0 becomes two 0 and a last carry,
so the result is a carry 00.
And then you have to fill out all the rows
because in the input we have four variables.
We gonna have two to the
power of four rows, 16 rows.
You have to fill out all these rows
and calculate when the S1 becomes 0 or.
One when S to become 01 headset,
then you have to design ASOP or PU S4S14
S 24S3 and then put it in a algebraically
simplify that or put it in a condo map.
So if I want to use the car
map to simplify this out,
what type of corner map I have to use?
What's the number of variable
in the corner map? Anybody?
Correct, because in the
input we have four variables,
so we have to create the
four variable color map.
For instance, we have to do this.
And then put the.
Form the I put the X1 and X2 here and then a,
Y1 and Y2 here and then based
on these midterms I have to
how many corner map I need.
I need one for S1 and then simplify
that 14S214C so free Connor map I
have to create and simplify that.
So and then you design the circuit
based on the simplified version
of the I mean Boolean functions.
But The thing is,
if I extend this to add 2 binary
numbers that have free bits.
So then I have to add a column here for X3.
Also another column for Y-3 so
it becomes six input variables.
2 to the power of 6 rows I have to fill out.
And then it becomes a huge.
I mean, uh.
Truth table.
If I want to extend it to adding two binary
numbers that each of them have 4 bits.
So again I have to extend the truth table.
So if I want to use the original designs,
it becomes very complicated if the number
of bits in each number actually grows.
So the idea is that instead of just
building any circuits from the scratch,
let's reuse what we've designed so far.
We have a half brother that is
able to add 2 bits.
So the idea is that now that
I want to add 2 binary numbers
that each of them has 2 bits,
is it possible to use two
half adders to add 2 bits?
So the idea is that reuse whatever
we design so far instead of just
building any circuits from the scratch.
So let's back to the original examine
problem. We want to add 2 numbers.
Each of them has 2 bits.
I could say that I can.
For adding these two bits,
I can use 1/2 adder.
That is able to add 2 bits.
Also for this one.
I can use another half adder.
So I go to the market.
I buy two half adders,
each one is responsible to
do the addition of each bits.
So let's do that. So I go to the market.
I buy two half adders and then
I say that X1 plus XY1 and this
is the sum of them and then X2
plus Y2Y2 using the half brother.
And this is the second sum.
And this is going to be the carry.
The only thing here is that the
only problem is that.
How should I handle this carry?
So let's back to the original problem.
If the 1st edition.
S1 and there's a cat equals here,
but the half adder only accepts 2 bits.
How can I support the carry from
the addition of the first bits?
So in another words,
if Carry off the first half other.
How can I handle this situation?
For instance,
1 + 1 using the first half adder
becomes 2, and now using the second
half adder, how can I input one because
they have other only accept 2 bits.
So I have to find a way.
2 include the carry of the first
half other to the second half after.
So basically I have to create some new
input to the second half adder in order to
include the carry from the previous step.
So in order to fix this, you have to say
that half Adder with only two inputs are not.
The correct design kind of enough design.
Let's design a new circuit that is able
to add 3 bits instead of two bits.
If I could design A circuit that is
able to add 3 bits for 1/2 other,
I could say that I have three inputs,
but I input zero in one of them,
so it acts like 1/2 adder.
If I have another.
Bits I can add it one so it becomes
a other that adds 3 bits. So if I.
Fix the half adder in order to
support an additional input.
Then not only it can act like an half adder,
but also you can act like an half adder,
plus adding one additional bit.
So let's do that.
So we want to do this.
We want to redesign the half other.
This time they have other needs
to add not only X&Y bottles,
so additional input,
so we want to build another with three bits.
So with three bits,
if you try the only possibility for
the output gonna be one output for ASN,
one out for the carry.
In the maximum case, or in the worst case,
we're going to have X1Y1 and
the additional input one,
so the output gonna be one and a carry.
So this is the worst case or the maximum
case that happens with adding three bits.
So let's design this.
When we designed the circuit,
now we call this.
We haven't designed it yet,
but if we design this circuit that is
support that support an additional input.
Then we call it a full adder.
Now you see that was the difference
within half other than full adder.
The difference is that the full
other supports adding with Carrie
or well adding with additional bit,
but they have other only accept 2 bits.
There is no additional bit.
So usually the latter,
I mean the additional input,
which usually is a carry.
We call it a carry from previous
calculation and we put it in this
side of the circuit instead of
just putting in this side.
We don't believe that here we put
it here because we want to show that
this is the additional input that
comes from previous calculation.
Now let's design what is full adder.
So very similar to our design from
this scratch. So how many inputs we have?
We have three inputs,
how many outputs we have.
We have two outputs,
so we create the truth table.
So here is the design we want to
design an adder with three bits,
two inputs and one additional carry bit.
So the truth ever going to have
free binary inputs
XY and additional input carry from
previous calculation an as we saw,
we need only two outputs,
the sum and carry.
And then we have three inputs,
2 to the power of three becomes 8 rose.
You have to fill out the truth here
for eight rows and the left side
all the possibilities in the right
side you have to calculate them.
For instance this one.
If I want to add a X which
is one with Y which is 1 an,
I have additional input as a carry.
So what is going to be the output?
So 1 + 1 + 0 becomes two we have
zero in the S and we have a carry.
So as is 0 and we have a cab.
In this case, we already saw that, so one.
Plus 1 + 1 becomes one in the
sum and one in the carry.
So, um.
Yes, so then we have to design it SOP 4S.
You can see that this is the midterm 1248012.
Four and then seven, and then for
the carry we have the meeting free.
5/6 and seven. So, uh,
what type of corner map I can use?
I had a question in the previous edition Sir.
Oh oh oh, in the previous edition.
I think you mean this one.
The Y was zero, not one. So as I said,
I'll OK, so I I said X is 1,
Y is 0 and we have the carry as one.
So if you do this 1 + 1 + 0 becomes two,
you have zero in the sum and we have a carry.
And so, as is zero and carries one. Excess.
Oh, I see now.
Yeah, because I mean, uh, this is X&Y.
And then this is the carrier.
So very similar to the previous design,
so we have three input
input in the truth table.
So we need a corner map if you want
to use the car map to simplify
that karnaugh map with three variables,
so X&Y goes to the column side and
the last the higher significant bits,
which is here,
the Carrie goes to zero side
and then you put the one for the
midterms that makes these some.
11 Column afford one output function
which is S another karma for the
carry and then we have to make one
for those meetings that they carry
one and zero for those midterms.
That makes the carry zero.
And then we have to simplify them.
So let's start with the S the first output.
So. When we look at the economy map,
we see that the cells that are
one or diagonal.
So whenever I said that whenever
we have a diagonal in the car map,
it helps.
It kind of hints that there is no
way to simplify because there is
no way that you can create a shared
region based on the adjustment cells.
But I said another thing.
So whenever you have a diagonal
or main diagonal or the other
diagonal in the car map.
What's the gate that the karnaugh
map actually tries to say to us?
Correct, Tatiana? Yes.
So as I said, whenever you see
a diagonal in the economy map,
although it says that there is no way
to simplify that using the I mean.
For the aesopi for more PS4,
but it hints or it helps us to kind
of simplify that using the exclusive
or so this is an example of that so.
We cannot create any shared region,
so we have to write down the whole midterm.
So midterm, 1 midterm, 2, four and seven.
And then, but one thing is that here.
You can extract this variable.
Also, here you can extract this variable.
It becomes this.
Inside the parentheses,
if you look at the inside the parentheses.
The first parentheses is the
exclusive or between X&Y.
And the second parentheses is
the exclusive, nor between X&Y.
So we can write it so the
first one is the exclusive or,
the second one is the exclusive norm.
But we already know that the exclusive or
an exclusive nor or not of each other.
That was one of the lecture
assignments in previous weeks,
so the exclusive or. Not.
If you do, the calculation here
becomes exclusive nor and vice versa.
The nut of excessive number
becomes excessive or so.
Instead of the exclusive nor,
I write it down based on the
exclusive or followed by the nuts.
So then you can assume that the
inside the parenthesis is an
Alpha or a new binary variable.
So this becomes Alpha.
This becomes Alpha Bar or not,
of the Alpha.
So then if you look at this expression,
it becomes another exclusive or between
this variable and this variable.
So you can write it down as the.
Carry exclusive or with Alpha,
but what was Alpha?
The Alpha was X exclusive or Y with Y?
So this is the final result.
So basically if you want to add 2 bits,
it becomes X exclusive or Y if
you want ad free bits it becomes
exclusive or of all the inputs.
It can guess that if you have four inputs,
4 bits in the inputs and
you want to some 4 bits,
it becomes the exclusive
or of them all of them.
So this is the final answer or
final simplified version only
using two exclusive or gates.
And also you can drop the parentheses,
because the exclusive or you
know that it's associative,
but I put it here in a Gray sentence
that let's keep them because it hints
that this means that the exclusive
or of the first original inputs and
then exclusive or with the additional
input from previous calculation.
And now let's go to the Carrie.
If you go to the Carrie, we see that.
So we can create 3 shared region.
All these are overlapping, so.
One of them is the this one.
XY, and as you can see,
X&Y was the carry when we have only two bits.
But here we have 3 bits, so.
This region. And this region,
which is equal to these two terms.
So if you look closely to these two terms,
you see that it says that each
pair of the input must be and with
each other and then altogether.
So XYX carry from previous version,
previous calculation anhuai with
Carol from the previous calculation.
So you have. See X&Y, each pair of them.
XY and. CX and and then see.
Y and so each pair of them and
with each other becomes the
carry for the calculation.
When you have free bits.
And here is the final design.
So if you have 3 bits in the input.
X exclusive or with Y and then
exclusive or with the additional bits.
The final S and the carry is
and of each pair of the input.
Final or. So like previous half
adder I just rooted them with 90
degree and then this is the design.
So 2 bits in the input,
one additional input as a carry from
previous step and then the two outputs.
And we call this full adder.
So you see that there is a difference
between the half adder, an full adder.
They have other only had these two.
Gates X exclusive or with Y an X&Y.
So this is the half adder.
But here we have additional bits.
So because of this additional bit,
we have extra exclusive or and we have
additional 2 and and one final or.
And now if you go to the market,
you can buy full adder.
So now we fixed the problem of half Adder.
Now we can add 2 bits with
additional bit from as a carry.
So if I want to add 2 numbers
that have two bits, each of them,
Now I can assume that I'll go to the market.
I buy one full adder.
And also I bought another full adder.
So I need 2 full adders
for the first full other.
I passed 0 for the second
one I passed the carry from
the previous calculation.
The output of the first
full adder is this one.
The out of the second full adder is S2
and the final carry which go which is
the output of this second full adder.
And here is the design.
So I basically stack two full adders and
then I can do the addition of two numbers.
Each of them has 2 bits.
XYX one Y1X 2Y2.
And then the carry from previous.
Addition goes to the additional
input of the second full adder.
The first one doesn't have
any previous calculation,
so we can assume that this is 0 or for
the first one we can use the half adder.
Either for the first one we can fool
other with the input carry zero,
or we can use the half adder
only for the first bit.
But for the other,
all the other bits,
we need a Fuller.
So now if I ask you how can we design
an adder that is able to add 2 numbers,
each number has three bits.
How can you design that?
You design by the truth table or you
go to the market and buy. Full adders
anybody?
Tatiana says free full adder. Anybody else?
How about others? I mean we
have 35 students in the class.
My question is this.
Now that using the full adder,
we can add a 3 bits when we had a 2 bits.
When we have numbers of two bits,
for instance, the first number
is 2 bits and the second #2 bits.
We go to the market instead of designing
by the truth table and simplify them, etc.
We design will go to the market and buy 2
full adders and then do the calculation.
My question is that if now we have.
We are going to add 2 numbers.
Each of them has three bits.
Should I design it by the truth table
and I put for instance the three?
Input variables for the X3 input
variables for the Y and then three
output variables for. Outputs or.
I can buy full adders and to
do their calculation.
Which one is the best?
Correct, yes. So basically for any
two binary numbers with N bits,
I go to the market an odd boy
and full adders. For instance,
here I have adding two binary numbers,
each of them has a four bits.
So I assume that instead of designed
this adder by the truth table,
because if I design it by truth table,
how many variables are needed if I
want to design this by truth table?
So if I design this by truth table.
How many input I need?
And how many app would I need?
So I want to design this problem so I
want to do adding two binary numbers.
Each of them has four bits.
So. For the inputs I need 4
bit for the X4 bit for the Y,
so becomes 8 bits also. I need.
4 bits for the carries.
So then they come fee by 4 bits in
the input so it becomes 12 inputs.
How many rows I'm going to
have two to the power of 12.
That's a huge truth table.
So I mean kind of.
It's not actually practically possible
to design this by the truth table.
So the solution is that basically go to
the market by 4 full adders and Instagram.
So the first bit adding the second bit,
adding the third Pitan 4th fourth
bit and then the first bit there
is no carry for the first bit
zero and the carrier of the first
full adder goes to the carrier of.
Second, flooder.
The carrier of the second father
goes to third full Adder and the
carrier of the third full other goes
to 4th letter and the carrier of the
last full adder is the final carry.
If I need 5 bit adder so I
buy another full adder here.
And then I attach the last full
carry to the additional input of
the last full adder and then the
two inputs gonna be X5. Why 5?
So you see that by reusing a full adder,
I'm able to build a N bit binary adder.
Here we have 4 bits, will be by full full
address or we have a four bit adder.
And always the first carry. Is 0.
Because there is no previous calculation.
And actually, if you go to the market,
this is the sketch or this is
the I mean specification or the.
The fact sheet of the, uh, a chip.
And you can buy for instance
if 4 bit binary adder.
46 dollar 6 something dollar
from eBay and then you can
attach it to your circuit and do
the addition with four bits.
This is a famous chip.
This is the number of the
chip that you can buy.
One thing here is that it says fast carry.
I just want to give it as a hint,
but I won't cover it here.
Maybe I mean if you have time I will come.
I will cover it.
The thing is that if you look at
it closely to the four bit adder.
Each full adder must be done first
in order to generate the carry.
This is the cherry one.
As you can see here and then
give it to the second full adder
and then this should be done
in order to generate the next.
Carry And etc.
So how many times or how many time
period or time is spot I have to
wait until I see the last carry.
So if you can them so first
calculations second calculation 3rd,
and then fourth calculation.
So I have to wait for 4th four time
interval to see the last carry.
Then I'm sure that the result is stable.
Without seeing the last Carrie,
I have to still see what is S4,
what is the X3 and etc.
So if these full others are is
slow I have to wait a lot of
time to see the final results
as the correct reliable result.
But if these are fast as
we said in this course,
we assume that there is no delay zero delay
So when we provide the inputs to the full
adders I can see right away the output.
But in in reality.
There is a delay for each gate.
As a result,
I have to wait up until these
carry generated and then give it
to the next full other an etc.
Up until the last carrier.
If I have N bit full adder,
I have waited for end times in order
to give the full address to generate
the carries and then give give
the carry to the next full other.
And finally, we see the final result.
That's why they say that fast carry.
So far we said that we have N bit
adder but we haven't discussed that
these numbers are signed or unsigned.
I leave it for you to think
about that at home that.
Does it matter that we think about
whether the given number are signed or
unsigned when we are designing the other?
Think about that, and the answer is no,
it doesn't matter,
because sign and unsigned numbers in binary
systems are basically the interpretation,
not the actual bits.
So for the binary addition
they just do addition.
They don't have an interpretation of
the numbers as a positive or negative.
This Is Us that we put another
convention on the numbers,
but you can think about that and you can.
Try adding two unsigned numbers
or sign numbers with this
design and see what happens.
The next unit after the addition
is very trivial, the subtraction.
All back with your questions
or keep your questions.
I mean in the queue I'll be back
with your questions questions,
yeah when I'm done with this subtracted.
So now let's move to the
subtracter after the addition.
We already know how we can do this
subtraction in binary system in an easy way.
When we have the subtraction,
we said that there is a possibility
that we have in negative numbers
and we introduced two systems
to represent negative numbers,
sign magnitude and twos compliment,
and we said that I believe that
because of the lab assignment,
you know that the sign magnitude is a
little bit hard to do this calculation
and twos complement is the most easiest
assistant that can do the calculation
representing negative numbers.
So now I'm going to use the we want
to build or design is subtracter,
so we have the option to choose
sign magnitude or Two's complement.
So we go with the easiest one.
So the two complement.
So we want to design A circuit
that does the subtraction in twos
complement and now you see the nice
property of the Two's complement,
not only you already saw the how
easy it is to do the calculation in.
Whose compliment now you see that?
It is also very easy to design the
actual circuit to do this subtraction.
So we already knew that subtraction
in Two's complement.
Is basically if you have two numbers X&Y,
each has N bits.
For instance, the first 112 N,
the second one is this, so X -- Y.
It is equal to addition with
Two's complement,
so X -- y is equal to X plus
the Two's complement of Y.
Already know that.
And the Two's complement of a binary
number is equal to 1's complement
of the binary number plus one unit.
Again, this is the lab, I mean two or three.
You already knew how to do that.
And the one's complement of a binary
number is basically is the nut of each digit.
So you can simply do the not.
Bitwise on each digit of Y.
And then add 1 unit.
So you see that in Two's complement there
is no need for additional digital circuit.
It is possible to reuse the other because
the subtraction becomes addition.
So basically, the X -- Y is equal
to X + y bitwise not plus one unit,
and this one unit could be the first
carry that we already assumed that this is 0.
Now we make it 1 in order to add
with another bit of 1.
And this is the reuse of the four bit adder,
but this time because we input
one in the input carry.
And also we input the nut of the Y,
so the not of the Y becomes ones complement.
This is XX.
Plus one's complement plus
one which is X -- Y.
Based on the Two's complement system.
So if we input the nut of the Y
and then make the input carry one,
we are doing X.
Plus one's complement of Y.
Plus one unit which is equal to X -- Y.
So this addition acts like subtraction.
So whenever the input is 0.
And the second, uh,
input, the Y is itself.
It means that X + y + 0.
So this is the addition.
Whenever we input one an instead of,
why we input Y bar,
it acts like subtraction.
So isn't it nice?
I mean, you have just one adder,
you go to the market and you buy.
Just 4 bit other and not only
you can do the addition,
you can do the subtraction,
but just providing the proper
value in the input carry.
Anne not of this second number.
One thing is that what is the gate
that if you can see here if the
input of the carry is 0 addition?
If it is one subtraction with not.
So again 0 addition.
X&Y is the actual bits
when it is 1 subtraction,
Y becomes not of the origonal bit.
So what gates acts like this?
What gate I can put here that if I
do the gates on the input with zero?
It has no effect,
but if I do that gate with one,
it makes it not. Why I need this?
Because I can put that gate here.
If the input is 0, no effect.
If the input is 1,
not only makes the carry one,
but also it wants to.
I want to make the input of the why not?
What would be the gate here?
So if you put NAND so Nat is and not.
So if I put a. And and zero,
so A-90 is equal to A and
zero followed by the nuts.
So if I put this if a is zero 0
+ 0 and 0 is zero followed by
the not becomes one. But a is 0.
So I cannot use that NAND is not
correct because if you put NAND here
an A is 0 the output gonna be a bar.
Any other gates? Actually,
that was the question in the meter.
I need the gate that the identity
bits for that gate is zero.
What gate has the identity element 0?
Correct or so if I put all anything?
Or with zero is itself.
So one option is or,
but The thing is that I want
that get to do this behavior
as well if I want to do a.
Or one I want to output a bar,
but if you or anything is 1,
the output gonna be 1. Not a bar.
So all is correct as long as
you have the first equation.
But what is the gate that not only
acts like this but also act like this?
So the answer is exclusive or
actually the exclusive or is one of
the most famous and common gates.
That helps us in many I mean circuits,
so any binary numbers,
exclusive or with zero itself.
So that was the midterm exam,
so the identity element of exclusive or is 0.
And also the identity element
of the exclusive. Nor is 1.
However, if you exclusive or
any binary number with one,
it applies light and not.
So now I can use this circuit.
I can design this circuit.
I could say that I renamed the input carry,
attach it to the input M.
If M is 0, the circuit acts like an adder.
Why? Because M is 00 goes here and then
here zero goes here, here, here and here.
An anything exclusive or with zero is itself,
so at the end I'm going to
have a Y4 without any change.
Why 3 without any change?
Why 2 without any change?
Why one without any change?
So if M is zero, it acts like an adder,
so I'm adding X + Y.
However, if I make the M1.
This.
Becomes one.
And one goes here.
On anything exclusive or
with one makes it not.
And now I am adding X. Plus one.
Plus ybar. Which is X -- Y,
so it acts like a SBTRKT.
So I go to the market.
I buy an adder and then buy this wiring.
I make it added an subtracter.
In the books or in other design,
usually they show it like this,
so this is the chip that you
buy at the end with other.
This is the input for the second number.
This is the input for the first number,
and this is the control wire.
If you input zero,
it acts like an adder.
If you input one,
it acts like a subtractor.
So. You can see that by
using the Two's complements,
not only the calculation is very easy,
but also the design is very easy.
We reuse the adder for the subtraction.
We already saw that in in the
twos compliment anything goes
like becomes like an addition.
So, but the only thing you have
to be careful and we haven't
discussed is the overflow.
We already saw that when we do calculation,
there is a chance for overflow.
We already know how to capture the overflow,
but when we are in the Two's complement
system scientist complement system.
So when an overflow happens
in Two's complement, anybody?
When an overflow happens.
Yes, this is 1 case as Son
is correct about one case.
So if I have two positive
numbers and I do the addition
and the result becomes negative.
This is 1 case or.
If I have two negative numbers,
Philip is correct, yes,
this is the second case.
If I have two negative numbers.
And the result become positive.
This is the second case,
so these are the cases that
an overflow happens.
So now I have to design or add a
circuit that captures the overflow after
doing the addition or subtraction.
So I have to basically extend this
design to capture the overflow.
So one way is again go from this scratch
and build it in from the truth table.
So imagine we have a 2 bit other.
I have all the bits in the input,
so these are the bits for the first number.
These are the bits for the
second number and plus a carry.
And then I have to check all of them
whether the overflow happens or no.
Based on this rule, make it 1 or 0.
If I extend it to the three bit adder again,
these are the inputs an etc.
So based on the truth table,
it becomes a huge truth table if you increase
the number of bits in the binary numbers.
So this is not a good way to design A
function that detects the overflow.
As we said, we already know that.
Festival in Two's complement.
Any arithmetic becomes edition.
Addition is addition, subtraction
becomes addition with two scammers,
so anything becomes edition.
This is first case.
Second case,
the overflow happens in addition case,
so we don't have.
We don't have to be careful
about this subtraction,
because subtraction becomes addition,
so the only case we have to
care about is the addition.
What are the cases addition of
positive numbers becomes negative?
Addition of negative numbers become positive,
so this is.
These are the only cases that
makes creates an overflow.
But the third property is very
important and you already saw this
property in your lecture assignments.
In binary system, only in the binary systems.
The last bits acts like a sign
bit in the sign magnitude.
This is The only exception for the binary
system WHI is that we already checked
that in the Two's complement system.
If you have N bits,
the first range of numbers are positive.
The second range of the numbers are negative.
This is our interpretation.
For instance in base 10 this is the I mean.
The middle range,
any number equal or lower than this
number is considered positive.
Any number greater than this
number becomes negative.
However,
the noise property of the binary
system is that this first half is this.
When we have N bits,
and if you check the last bit.
It is very similar to the sign
bit in the sign magnet system.
So if the number is lower than this number,
it is positive. In another word.
If this bit is zero, it is positive.
If the number is greater than that number,
which becomes one unit after that number,
which becomes this?
Equal or greater than this number becomes
negative, and if you look at this.
A number.
The first bit is 1 and all
the other numbers may be one.
I mean greater than zero and etc.
So this bits shows that the number
becomes negative in bonuses and
this is the only case in binary
system influences in base 10.
This is the number in the
highest significant position.
So this nice property,
our binary system,
that the last bits in the Two's
complement acts like not similar?
Not the same but similar or like
did sign magnitude helps us to
detect the overflow much easily.
So let's see how can we do that.
So imagine we have this
addition in Two's complement.
So this addition is either
originally addition,
so at the first we wanted to add 2
numbers or it was subtraction and we did
the Two's complements with the addition.
And finally this becomes the addition.
So either originally was addition
or after we make it addition
with the Two's complement which
was originally subtraction,
but we made it addition with his compliment.
And this is the Two's complement
of the original number.
In any case, it becomes addition.
Now we have to be careful
about this overflow.
So the only case that all flow
happens is that this is 1 case that
overflow happens this 2 numbers.
Are positive why these are positive?
Because in Two's complement system,
in binary system the higher
significant bit acts like a sign bit.
These are zero. As a result,
these this number is lower than the
first range within the first range,
so it is positive this number
is also within the first range.
This is positive.
However, if I see this last
bit of or the S4 becomes one.
It means that this number lies
within this second range of numbers.
As a result, this is negative.
Addition of two positive
numbers becomes negative.
So this is an overflow.
But let's see when this happens.
We have 0 here. We have 0 here.
How can 0 + 0 becomes one?
The only possibility is that we have
a carry from this calculation that
goes here and this carry becomes one.
This is the only case.
That makes 2 positive numbers
becomes negative.
So if you do that,
if we assume that such case happens.
So it becomes 100,
which makes it one and the
carry the last Kelly becomes 0.
So this is the only case in the.
This is the case that happens when
we do addition of two positive
numbers and becomes negative.
When it happens,
it happens when we have a carry
from the previous calculation.
Because one.
And then the output carry becomes there.
So what is the other possibilities?
We do the addition of a negative
number Anna positive number.
Again, this edition might be
after applying the two scamp after
converting the Subtraction 2 edition.
So this is the negative.
This is the positive.
Never overflow happens whenever we
have two numbers of different size.
So you can try any possibilities
for these two numbers and you
can see that as I put it here.
If you don't believe it, you can try.
Never an overflow happens in this
case even I don't know the the sign.
Always the sign.
Bits for the result gonna
be in the correct form.
I leave it to you to try
all the possibilities.
Also, for this case,
again a positive number
and a negative number,
then the sign of the input
numbers are different.
As a result,
always the sign of the result
going to be in the correct form,
and this is another beauty
of the Two's complement.
But another case of all flow happens
when we have two negative numbers.
And the result is positive.
When this happens. When? The carry is 0.
Hello guys I'm back.
I think my Internet went down so.
I am so sorry about that.
So we are done for today.
I have to leave this session I
think. So then I can be back.
Oh, now I'm back. I don't know why
my Internet actually went down.
let me stop my recording?